they often hear people say that the Sun
is about halfway through its life and
then it's got maybe 5 billion years or
so left to live before it runs out of
fuel where does that number come from
though because the calculation itself is
actually not that difficult but we have
to know so many things that layer on top
of each other before we can even hope to
get at that number so what I'm gonna do
is I'm gonna go through the calculation
back of the envelope calculation nice
and simple for how we get that rough
estimate of the fact that the Sun has
about five or so billion years left to
live every time I say something that
you're gonna be like wait a minute how
do we even know that I'm gonna raise a
little flag I'm gonna make a list of all
the things that we need to know in order
to work out how long my son has left to
live and I'm gonna come back and explain
how we even know that in the first place
okay so to work out how long the Sun has
left to live we first of all need two
things we need to know how massive the
Sun is and how bright the Sun is
something we call it's the luminosity
how much energy is it giving off per
second now the sun's mass is 2 times 10
to the 30 kilograms or 2 with 30 zeros
after it its luminosity is 3 point 8
times 10 to the 26 watts or joules per
second energy given off by the Sun per
second and with these two numbers we can
use one of the most famous equations in
the entirety of physics I'm talking
about Einsteins e equals mc-squared
mass and energy are equivalent so if you
have something with mass M then you can
turn it into energy E so assuming that
the Sun powers itself with fuel that it
has inside of it we can assume that the
sun's mass is its fuel for its energy
and so with e equals mc-squared we can
work out the total energy that the Sun
would have plugging in those numbers we
can then divide that by the amount of
energy it's giving off per second to get
how long the Sun will live in total in
seconds then we can convert that to
years and we get an answer that is far
far too big now the reason it's too big
is because that calculation has assumed
that the sun's entire mass ie all the
stuff that in the Sun will be available
to use as fuel for it to burn to give
off light and heat and energy which we
love because it allows us to have fun
days at the seaside but that's not the
case
the way the Sun powers itself is by
nuclear fusion it takes atoms of
hydrogen and fuses them together to make
helium and in that reaction energy is
given out and that's the energy that we
then receive on earth the thing is it's
only hot enough in the very center of
the Sun for those reactions to take
place you need to tremendous amount of
to force four hydrogen atoms together
so actually nuclear reactions are only
taking place in the core of the Sun
which is about ten percent of its mass
if we use ten percent of two times ten
to the 30 kilograms we still get too big
of a number out from our calculation but
some of you might have picked up already
on the reason for that is that the
hydrogen in the Sun that it's using as
fuel isn't purely converted to energy
like e equals mc-squared assumes some of
it turns into helium need four hydrogen
atoms to make one of helium and a helium
atom is actually ninety-nine point seven
percent of the mass of four hydrogen
atoms so actually only ten percent of
the total mass is useful for nuclear
fusion and you'll only get point zero
zero three but if that mass converted to
energy and if we use those numbers then
we get out that the Sun has about ten
point five billion years worth of
hydrogen fuel available to it but that's
the total lifetime of the Sun not how
long the Sun had left to live to work
out that you have to know how old the
Sun is already and we know that that is
4.5 billion years old so if you take one
from the other
you get about six billion years old
which for a back-of-the-envelope
calculation is not bad if you do it
properly with all of the modeling then
you come at the sort of more green value
of say like five billion years or so but
you know what's one billion years
between astrophysicists and friends so
back-of-the-envelope calculation done
here's our list of seven things that got
flagged that I said that we needed to
know in order to be able to do that
calculation and I think you'll agree
it's quite a long and interesting
looking list and probably a lot of you
will be wondering yeah how did we work
those things out so first up the mass of
the Sun how do you calculate how much
stuff is in this
when we're stuck on the fact of the
earth is in orbit around the Sun though
means that the gravitational force
pulling the earth inwards towards the
Sun is perfectly balanced by the
centrifugal force pushing outwards on
the ear so just like you do when you get
on a merry-go-round and if you've been
on a merry-go-round you know that you
feel that force pushing you off the
merry-go-round as you go faster and
faster and so by balancing those
equations we can see that we can measure
the mass of the Sun if we know how fast
the earth is moving and but what
distance it is from the Sun and then
also this gravitational constant which
was the first sort of accurately
measured properly in a lab by Henry
Cavendish now we obviously don't know
the speed the earth is moving around the
Sun but speed equals distance over time
and the time that the earth travels
around the Sun is well a year 365 days
or 365.25 days anyway we know that the
distance it travels is just the
circumference of its orbit which if we
assume is circular and you remember your
high school math is just 2 pi R of
course actually the orbit of the earth
is sort of more elliptical shape but
let's go with circles right now because
it's just a little bit easier in terms
of the math and so then we can cancel
out that speed that the earth goes round
the Sun just to get an expression in
terms of the distance of the Earth from
the Sun and then also the time it takes
to go around and this gravitational
constant again so okay we only need to
find the distance from the earth to the
Sun to measure how massive the Sun is
how do you get the distance from the
earth to the Sun though is there for the
next question measuring the distance to
objects that aren't solid is very
difficult but solid things we can do
that dead easy right we do it all the
time with air traffic control that use
radar radar takes radio waves and it
bounces it off the solid object comes
back you know the speed that the waves
have traveled at so the time delay gives
you the distance but the Sun is not
solid it's a plasma which basically
means that it's like a gas but the
electrons found in orbit around the
atoms anymore they're just like freely
roaming so you've got sort of like a
charged
soup of particles basically so we can't
use radar to measure the
to the Sun but we could use radar to
measure the distance to solid objects in
the solar system like other planets for
example and if we think about the setup
of earth going around the Sun and say
Venus or mercury going around the Sun
then there's a special place in Venus's
and Earth's orbits where they make a
right angle triangle with the Sun so if
you wait for Venus to get to that point
and it makes this perfect right-angled
triangle you can measure the distance
between Earth and Venus easily because
it's a solid and it will bounce the
radio wave back off nice and easy you
can then measure the angle between Venus
and the Sun in the sky at that point and
then it's just trigonometry to work out
that distance between the Earth and the
Sun so all you haters on trigonometry
out there that's like trigonometry is
not useful outside of school well it's
to me anyway next up the luminosity of
the Sun and you think this would be an
easy thing to measure because you're
just measuring the amount of energy you
get from the Sun per second which you
can do if maybe you say leave a part of
water out in the Sun and see how quickly
it heats up for example you could
measure the amount of energy you're
getting the thing is you're only
measuring the amount of energy that
reaches us on earth so the total output
from the Sun will go out into a sphere
and then we'll only measure that tiny
cross-section that intersects with your
pan of water or your solar panel to
measure the amount of energy we're
getting that's something called the flux
rather than the luminosity flux is
proportional to the luminosity divided
by the distance to that object squared
now we just talked about how we get the
distance from the earth to the Sun so if
we just measure the flux of energy you
receive on earth we can then easily get
back to the luminosity of 3.8 times 10
to the 26 joules per second next up e
equals mc-squared
Einstein's most famous equation in fact
probably the most famous equation in the
world but how do we know that energy
mass or equivalent and how do we know
that you happen to times the mass by C
squared it all comes from a
consideration of how much energy things
at rest compared to things that are
moving have so you'll have learned at
school that kinetic energy things that
are moving have an energy of 1/2 MV
squared so their mass times by their
velocity squared
but photons don't have mass and yet when
they're moving at this incredible speed
they still have energy and momentum so
that kinetic energy formula doesn't
really work so if you work through all
of the maths of what the energies of
different particles with mass and
without mass have which is actually just
high school that's it's not overly
difficult then you actually come down to
the conclusion that an object completely
at rest will have the energy equal to
its mass times by C squared
now I'm not gonna go through the math
here because that is probably a whole
video by itself but if you are super
interested in that Ethan Siegel from
starts on the bank has a fantastic
article on it and I will link it down
below so number four on our list that
the Sun is powered by nuclear fusion is
kind of intrinsically linked to number
six on our list but a helium atom is
99.7 percent of the mass of four
hydrogen atoms kind of needed one to
figure out the other but it's a little
bit of a long story how that was
actually figured out and it starts about
1904 when Ernest Rutherford discovered
the enormous amount of energy released
by radioactivity specifically alpha
decay when an atom of an element can
essentially decay into a lower mass
element and it does that by giving off
what we call an alpha particles I mean
it's two protons and two neutrons just
like in a helium atom and the fact that
so much energy could be given off by a
nuclear process made people think well
perhaps that's what's powering the Sun
this thing that's giving it off an
enormous amount of energy but it was
only very heavy elements that underwent
this radioactive decay things like
uranium plutonium the elements that
there
are so chock-full of protons and
neutrons that it's just really difficult
to hold them all there now if that was
the case if the Sun was powered by these
very heavy elements then we should be
able to detect the presence of those
elements in the light we get from the
Sun because all elements sort of leave a
quantum fingerprint on light because
either they absorb a specific wavelength
of light and that's very obvious when we
take the light from the Sun and we split
it through a prism through a spectrum
this is exactly what happens when you
get a rainy day or a waterfall and the
light is split through those little
water droplets and forms of rainbow what
you don't see though are the very very
specific wavelengths of light that are
actually missing because in a rainbow
they all sort of blur into one but if
you can get the resolution to see it you
see that that rainbow actually has gaps
in it dark bits where we don't see that
very specific color and it's because an
atom of a specific element that's in the
Sun has absorbed it but when you look at
those specific wavelengths and you
correlate them with the wavelengths of
absorption of light we see on earth when
we look in the lab you find that it's
mostly hydrogen and some helium and so
people quickly realize that actually
those heavy elements aren't present in
the Sun at all and that the Sun
therefore couldn't be powered by
radioactivity it was then in 1920 that a
British physicist called Aston actually
managed to measure the masses of
individual atoms of elements so he
managed to very very precisely measure
the mass of a hydrogen atom helium atom
and so on and so on through the periodic
table and he did that using a really
clever device called a mass spectrometer
and a mass spectrometer is sort of like
a chemists best friend I have already
thought about them since ailable so this
was fun doing this research for this
video but essentially what happens is
you first of all take out an electron
from around an atom and by removing an
electron you remove some negative charge
so you've positively charged the atom
that you then have you then fire that
item through the
mass spectrometer instrument where you
set up a magnetic field now electric
charges moving in magnetic fields they
have their paths deflected they have
their paths curved but the amount that
it's curved depends on how heavy the
thing is that's moving so if you send a
hydrogen atom down a low curve much more
than say a helium atom would that is
heavier than a hydrogen atom even though
they've got the exact same charge by
just removing one electron and with this
you can measure incredibly precise
masses over the elements what was
surprising to chemists at the time
though is that the elements atoms
weren't just pure multiples of each
other but it took Arthur Eddington
making the connection between that mass
difference an e equals mc-squared
to realize that if you could take four
atoms of hydrogen and somehow fuse them
together so that they became an atom of
helium then you would give out that tiny
difference in energy but if you had
enough hydrogen then you could get out
an enormous amount of energy by doing
that now that's great but it really was
only a hypothesis there was no way that
you could actually therefore test the
fact that that was going on in the Sun
except for the fact that you saw that
the Sun was mostly made of hydrogen and
some helium now through the 20th century
many physicists worked on the actual
theory of what would physically happen
in that process of taking four hydrogen
atoms and making into one helium atoms
it's not necessarily as simple as it
sounds so that included gamau Atkinson
kutiman and vice occur in the process
yes you formed the helium but you also
released two electrons two electron
neutrinos and then some energy now the
hydrogen helium we can't detect but what
about the neutrinos neutrinos are
incredibly incredibly tiny very small
mass particles in the standard model of
particle physics and they're not really
impeded by anything they can just go
through everything in their path and so
getting out of the Sun
is actually relatively easy for them
they literally stream out of the Sun
from these nuclear reactions we only
know that because people eventually
detect it those neutrinos on earth from
the Sun then men all the evidence
pointed towards nuclear fusion as the
process powering the Sun so I guess we
skipped number five on the list there
that the inner 10 ish percent of the Sun
is actually hot and dense enough for
these nuclear reactions to occur forcing
these hydrogen atoms together to become
helium now how we figured that out kind
of all falls under the umbrella of
helioseismology so Helio meaning the Sun
was in Helios the Sun God in Greek or is
it Latin
I think it's Greek and then seismology
which might be a word you recognize from
people studying earthquakes and it's
using those earthquakes that we've been
able to figure out what the interior of
the earth is like so what about sun
quakes as waves propagating through it
all the time and the closest sort of
analogy really is a sound way of
propagating through the Sun we like to
say the Sun rings and you can listen to
it and by listening to all the different
frequencies that you get as all those
waves ping around the interior of the
Sun interfere with themselves and set up
this weird pattern that we can then
unravel with some really clever maths
you can then figure out what's going on
in the interior because the pattern
depends on how fast the waves are moving
and what they're moving through and they
speed up and slow down depending on the
temperature and pressure of the stuff
that they're moving through so by
producing that map and I'm rambling all
the frequencies that we hear from the
Sun we can get an idea of what the
temperature and pressure is actually
like inside the Sun using that map we
can work out that only the inner 10% ish
is hot enough and has a high enough
pressure to be able to force atoms
together and knowing what that
temperature and pressure has to be your
comes from quantum physics and
understanding the behavior of atoms on
the very very tiny scales
again that wouldn't even just be a
single video like if you want to
understand quantum physics I'd recommend
doing an undergraduate degree in physics
but maybe one day I'll tackle a video on
that and so with all that information
and assuming that the Sun will start off
as a pure ball of hydrogen and be able
to use all that to convert it to energy
in its lifetime we get the total
lifetime of the Sun but that's not how
long the Sun has left to live for that
we need to know the last thing on our
list which is the age that the Sun is
now it's not something we can really get
from studying the Sun you know it's not
like a tree that we can cut down and
count the Rings but what we can assume
from other sort of planetary systems and
new stars forming in the rest of our
galaxy in the Milky Way we can assume
that the Sun and the planets and
everything else in the solar system all
formed at the same time so if you can
measure the age of another object in the
solar system then you can get at the age
of the Sun now we could try and find
some the oldest rocks on earth but most
of the rocks on earth will have been pre
processed because the fact that well we
have you know volcanoes and plate
tectonics that sort of like melt down
rocks and reform them so really what we
need is a relic from the very early days
of the solar system that sort of been
left alone
pristine from it very first formation
and luckily we have those in the form of
asteroids that then fall to earth is
meteorites now in those meteorites and
asteroids are those very heavy elements
like uranium and plutonium that undergo
this radioactive decay so for example
uranium decays into lead so if you know
the rate at which that happens and you
can measure how much lead there is then
you should be able to work out how old
it is except for the fact that you don't
know how much uranium you started with
but what if we had two different types
of uranium that decayed at two different
rates into two different types of lead
then what we'd end up with is two
different amounts of lead that have
arrived at that point at two different
rates and that would allow you to get it
how old that object is they probably
thinking how can you have a different
type of uranium Becky it's an element
it's the same thing it's just uranium
right but if you add extra neutrons to
an atom you make something which is
called an isotope it's the same element
it's just a little bit heavier with
those extra neutrons and so that's what
makes it decay at that different rate
because you've actually got a more
unstable atom by adding those extra
neutrons so by working out the ratio of
the two different lead isotopes you'd
get in the end products you can get how
old the asteroid and therefore the solar
system and therefore the Sun is which
you find is about four and a half
billion years old yeah so that was all
the information we needed to answer that
one question how long does the Sun have
left to live it's incredible when you
think about it like how many results and
even different areas of science had to
come together for us over centuries of
research for us to be able to answer
that question so next time you hear
someone say the Sun is halfway through
its life or has five ish billion years
to live I hope you think about all the
human effort and centuries of work that
went into producing just that one number
I know I wore this jumper like really
recently to film another video but it's
just so soft and cozy I'm tripping over
wires again Oh still not used to this
weird new arrangement don't know how I
feel about it it was then in 1920 that a
British physicist called Aston managed
to measure the very specific it was then
in 1920 that a British British furnish
I've got American British it's not
actually different is it now meteorites
there are those incredibly heavy
elements elements I can think Elmen
meteorites have ailments
then what we'd end up with is the ratio
between two different types of red red
LED then what we'd end up with would God
so that was my water bottles been on
this side the entire time they take one
sip and then I get the whole the whole
car the Sun was a hot dense place and
then 4.5 billion years ago
nuclear fusion started wait
you